ACT 1, SCENE 1
Enter FLAVIUS, MARULLUS, and certain Commoners over the stage. (1.1.1)—Marullus and Flavius turn away commoners who are on their way to see Caesar's triumphal procession.
Exeunt all the Commoners. (1.1.61)—Marullus and Flavius determine to "disrobe the images" of Caesar and do whatever else they can to stop his rise to power.
ACT 1, SCENE 2
Enter CAESAR; ANTONY, for the course; CALPURNIA, PORTIA, DECIUS, CICERO, BRUTUS, CASSIUS, and CASCA, [a great crowd following, among them a] Soothsayer; after them, Marullus and Flavius. (1.2.1)—Caesar makes a grand entrance, tells Antony to be sure to touch Calpurnia during his Lupercal run. A soothsayer warns Caesar to beware the ides of March, but Caesar dismisses him as a "dreamer."
Sennet. Exeunt. Manent BRUTUS and CASSIUS. (1.2.25)—Cassius tries to persuade Brutus that something must be done about Caesar's increasing power.
Enter CAESAR and his TRAIN. (1.2.181)—Caesar and his retinue return; Caesar comments on Cassius' "lean and hungry look."
Sennet. Exeunt CAESAR and all his Train. [CASCA stays.] (1.2.215)—Casca gives a sarcastic report on how Antony offered Caesar a crown.
Exit [CASCA]. (1.2.296) —Brutus tells Cassius he will speak to him again; after Brutus leaves, Cassius makes further plans to draw him into the conspiracy.
ACT 1, SCENE 3
Thunder and lightning. Enter [from opposite sides] CASCA [with his sword drawn] and CICERO. (1.3.1)—Casca tells Cicero of "a tempest dropping fire" and other strange portents, but Cicero is not impressed.
Exit CICERO. Enter CASSIUS [unbraced]. (1.3.42)—Cassius persuades Casca that the portents show that the heavens are warning against the power of Caesar, and Casca joins the conspiracy.
Enter CINNA. (1.3.131)—Cinna comes looking for Cassius, and tells him that the rest of the conspirators are waiting for him. Cinna also expresses the hope that Brutus can be persuaded to join the conspiracy. Cassius reassures Cinna and Casca that Brutus will soon be brought into the conspiracy.
ACT 2, SCENE 1
Enter BRUTUS in his orchard. (2.1.1)—In his garden before dawn, Brutus thinks over the reasons to kill Caesar. Lucius, Brutus' servant, brings Brutus a letter left in his window, urging him to take action. Brutus reads the letter and promises that he will save Rome.
Enter LUCIUS. (2.1.70)—Lucius, Brutus' servant, announces the arrival of the conspirators. Brutus shakes hands with all of them, but when Cassius suggests an oath, Brutus persuades them that it's not needed. Brutus also successfully opposes the suggestion that Antony be assassinated, too.
Clock strikes. (2.1.191)—A clock chimes three a.m., and the conspirators know it is time to disperse. Cassius worries that Caesar may decide to not go to the Senate that day, but Decius is sure that he can flatter him into it. They all agree that they will meet again at eight a.m., to escort Caesar to the Senate and his death.
Enter PORTIA (2.1.234)—Portia pleads with her husband to tell her what is on her mind. After she reveals a self-inflicted wound on her thigh, proving that she can be as Stoic as he, Brutus agrees to tell her all.
Exit PORTIA. Enter LUCIUS and [CAIUS] LIGARIUS [wearing a kerchief]. (2.1.310)—Ligarius, a sick man, declares that the prospect of joining Brutus' great enterprise will cure all illness.
ACT 2, SCENE 2
Thunder and lightning. Enter JULIUS CAESAR, in his night-gown. (2.2.1)—Concerned about Calpurnia's ominous nightmares, Caesar sends his servant to the priests for prophecies.
Exit [Servant]. Enter CALPURNIA. (2.2.8)—Calpurnia urges Caesar to stay at home, rather than going to the Senate; after considerable argument, Caesar says that he will stay at home and send word that he is sick.
Enter DECIUS. (2.2.57)—Decius comes to escort Caesar to the Senate; when Caesar says he will not come that day, Decius talks him into changing his mind.
Enter BRUTUS, LIGARIUS, METELLUS, CASCA, TREBONIUS, CINNA, and PUBLIUS. (2.2.108)—The rest of the conspirators arrive, and a little later, Antony. Caesar welcomes them and invites them to have some wine with him before they all go to the Senate.
ACT 2, SCENE 3
Enter ARTEMIDORUS [reading a paper]. (2.3.1)—Artemidorus reads a letter that he hopes to deliver to Caesar; the letter warns Caesar of the ill-will of the conspirators.
ACT 2, SCENE 4
Enter PORTIA and LUCIUS. (2.4.1)—Portia sends the servant Lucius to the Senate house for news, but she is flustered because she dare not reveal the real cause of her worry. She also asks the Soothsayer, who is passing by, for news, but he hasn't seen Caesar yet.
ACT 3, SCENE 1
Flourish. Enter CAESAR, BRUTUS, CASSIUS, CASCA, DECIUS, METELLUS, TREBONIUS, CINNA, ANTONY, LEPIDUS, ARTEMIDORUS, PUBLIUS, [POPILIUS,] and the SOOTHSAYER. (3.1.1)—On his way to the Senate house, Caesar sees the Soothsayer and says "The ides of March are come" (meaning that no disaster has happened), and the Soothsayer replies, "Ay, Caesar; but not gone." Artemidorus tries to deliver his letter of warning, but Caesar refuses it.
[CAESAR enters the Capitol, the rest following.] (3.1.13)—The conspirators fear that their plot will be betrayed by Popilius, but that doesn't happen. Trebonius draws Antony away.
[Exeunt ANTONY and TREBONIUS.] (3.1.27)—Kneeling to Caesar, Metellus Cimber humbly pleads for his brother's return from banishment; Brutus and Cassius follow suit. Caesar declares that he is as constant as Mt. Olympus.
They stab CAESAR. (3.1.77)—The conspirators stab Caesar to death, then reassure Publius and other bystanders that no harm is intended to them.
[Exeunt all but the Conspirators.] Enter TREBONIUS (3.1.96)—The conspirators praise their deed, bathe their hands in Caesar's blood, and determine to go out to the streets of Rome, proclaiming "Peace, freedom and liberty!"
Enter a Servant. (3.1.122)—Antony's servant enters to ask if it's safe for Antony to come and speak with Brutus. Brutus says it is, and Antony himself soon appears. He makes nice with the conspirators, mourns Caesar, and asks permission to take Caesar's body to the marketplace and deliver a funeral oration. Brutus grants Antony's request.
Exeunt. Manet ANTONY. (3.1.254)—Alone with Caesar's body, Antony promises that Caesar will be revenged and predicts that civil war will ensue.
Enter Octavius' Servant. (3.1.276)—The servant of Octavius Caesar is shocked at the sight of Caesar's body. Antony tells him to return to Octavius with the news, but not until after seeing how the people of Rome are affected by the speech that Antony will deliver.
ACT 3, SCENE 2
Enter BRUTUS and CASSIUS with the Plebeians. (3.2.1)—Brutus speaks to the plebeians, explaining "Not that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved Rome more."
Enter MARK ANTONY [and others] with CAESAR's body. (3.2.41)—The plebeians acclaim Brutus; he asks them to stay and listen to Antony.
Exit [Brutus]. (3.2.62)—Antony's speech stirs the plebeians to rage, and they rush off to burn the houses of the conspirators.
Exeunt Plebeians [with the body]. (3.2.261)—A servant brings news to Antony that Octavius has returned to Rome; Antony goes off to see him.
ACT 3, SCENE 3
Enter CINNA the poet, and after him the Plebians. (3.3.1)—The plebeian mob drags off Cinna the Poet for having the same name as one of the conspirators.
ACT 4, SCENE 1
Enter ANTONY, OCTAVIUS, and LEPIDUS. (4.1.1)—Antony, Octavius, and Lepidus agree on a list of those who will be executed in a purge of suspected enemies. Antony, wanting to find a way to reduce the expenses of Caesar's legacies, sends Lepidus for Caesar's will.
Exit LEPIDUS. (4.1.12)—Antony tells Octavius that Lepidus is a donkey who should be discarded as soon as they have no more use for him. Antony and Octavius agree that they need to take immediate action against the armies of Brutus and Cassius.
ACT 4, SCENE 2
Drum. Enter BRUTUS, LUCILIUS, [LUCIUS,] and the army. TITINIUS and PINDARUS meet them. (4.2.1)—Brutus, at the head of his army, meets two of Cassius' advance men. Brutus suspects that Cassius has engaged in corruption and is "A hot friend cooling."
Enter CASSIUS and his powers. (4.2.30)—when Cassius appears, he says "Most noble brother, you have done me wrong." Brutus persuades Cassius that they should hash out their differences in private, and they go into Brutus' tent.
ACT 4, SCENE 3
[Enter BRUTUS and CASSIUS.] (4.3.1)—Brutus and Cassius quarrel.
Enter a Poet [to LUCILIUS and TITINIUS, as they stand on guard]. (4.3.124)—As the quarrel is winding down, a poet forces his way into the tent, tells Brutus and Cassius that they should not be quarreling.
Exit Poet. (4.3.139)—Brutus calls for wine and tells Cassius that Portia has died. Messala delivers the news that Antony and Ocatvius have put to death many Senators, and that Portia committed suicide. Brutus and Cassius discuss strategy, and Brutus persuades Cassius that they should attack.
Exeunt [all but BRUTUS and LUCIUS]. (4.3.239)—Brutus prepares to sleep. He has two of his servants sleep in his tent, in case he needs them as messengers, and he asks Lucius to play him a tune. Lucius plays, but falls asleep; Brutus lets him sleep and starts to read a book.
Enter the Ghost of CAESAR. (4.3.275)—The ghost tells Brutus that he will see him at the Philippi, the scene of the next day's battle. Brutus replies stoically, "Why, I will see thee at Philippi, then."
[Exit Ghost.] (4.3.287)—Brutus asks Lucius and the other two servants why they cried out in their sleep and whether they saw anything. They all say that they saw nothing and that they weren't aware of crying out in their sleep. Brutus sends a message to Cassius that he is ready to begin the battle against the forces of Octavius and Antony.
ACT 5, SCENE 1
Enter OCTAVIUS, ANTONY, and their army. (5.1.1)—Octavius comments that their enemy is playing into their hands; instead of staying on the defensive in the hills, they are going to offer battle on the plains of Philippi. Octavius and Antony lead their forces to meet the enemy.
March. Drum. Enter BRUTUS, CASSIUS, and their army; [LUCILIUS, TITINIUS, MESSALA, and others]. (5.1.21)—There's a bitter parley between the leaders of the opposing armies.
Exeunt OCTAVIUS, ANTONY, and army. (5.1.66)—Out of earshot of Brutus, Cassius tells Messala of his grave misgivings about the battle that is about to begin. Speaking to Brutus, Cassius asks what he will do if they lose the battle. Brutus replies that he will never be taken as a captive to Rome. Brutus and Cassius say farewell to each other.
ACT 5, SCENE 2
Alarum. Enter BRUTUS and MESSALA. (5.2.1)—Brutus sends Messala with urgent orders to throw all forces into the attack.
ACT 5, SCENE 3
Alarums. Enter CASSIUS and TITINIUS. (5.3.1)—It appears to Cassius that his side is losing, and he sends Titinius to see if some forces in the distance are friend or foe. Cassius posts his slave Pindarus on a hill to observe Titinius. Pindarus reports that Titinius has been taken prisoner. Cassius orders Pindarus to kill him; Pindarus does so, and runs away.
[Exit PINDARUS.] Enter TITINIUS and MESSALA. (5.3.51)—Messala explains to Titinius (who was welcomed by friends, not captured by foes) that Brutus' wing of the army has had good success. They discover the body of Cassius. Messala goes to deliver the news to Brutus. For grief over the death of Cassius, Titinius kills himself.
Alarum. Enter BRUTUS, MESSALA, young CATO, STRATO, VOLUMNIUS, and LUCILIUS. (5.3.91)—Brutus mourns Cassius and Titinius, then tells his men that "yet ere night / We shall try fortune in a second fight."
ACT 5, SCENE 4
Alarum. Enter BRUTUS, MESSALA, [young] CATO, LUCILIUS, and FLAVIUS. (5.4.1)—Brutus urges his men on, then marches on with Messala and Flavius. Young Cato and Lucilius hurl defiance at the enemy, and Lucilius proclaims that his name is "Brutus." Cato is killed. Lucilius is captured. Lucilius urges his captor to kill him, but the soldier, thinking he has captured Brutus, is sure he must take him to Antony.
Enter ANTONY . (5.4.18)—Lucilius defiantly assures Antony that Brutus will never be taken prisoner. Antony orders that Lucilius be well taken care of because "I had rather have / Such men my friends than enemies."
ACT 5, SCENE 5
Enter BRUTUS, DARDANIUS, CLITUS, STRATO, and VOLUMNIUS. (5.5.1)—Brutus, facing certain defeat, asks, in turn, Clitus, Dardanius, and Volumnius to kill him, but they all refuse. The battle, and death and defeat, are coming nearer. Clitus, Dardanius, and Volumnius want to flee, and urge Brutus to do the same. Brutus tells them to go, and says he will follow. They run, and Brutus asks Strato to hold his sword, so that he can run on it and kill himself. Strato does so, and Brutus dies.
Alarum. Retreat. Enter ANTONY, OCTAVIUS, Retreat. MESSALA, LUCILIUS, and the army. (5.5.52)—Antony and Octavius, with Messala and Lucilius (formerly in the army of Brutus and Cassius), arrive. Strato tells them how Brutus died. Octavius invites Strato to be his man, and Strato, upon the recommendation of Messala, agrees. Antony praises Brutus as "the noblest Roman of them all," and Octavius orders the honorable burial of Brutus.