Act I-Scene I
The play opens with Old Knowell at home. He asks Brainworm, his servant, to call for his son, Edward Knowell—but not to disturb him if he is studying. Old Knowell expresses gladness that Edward is engaged with his education, but worries that he spends too much time “dreaming on naught but idle poetry, / That fruitless and unprofitable art.” Master Stephen, Old Knowell’s dim-witted nephew from the countryside, comes in. Stephen asks if Edward Knowell has any books on the “sciences of hawking and hunting” that he could borrow—he’s heard they are fashionable. Old Knowell chastises his nephew for being wasteful with his time and money, calling him a “prodigal absurd cockscomb.”

Act I-Scene II
A servant comes in with a letter for Edward. Old Knowell decides, as he too is called “Edward,” to read the letter and check up on his son. Stephen almost gets in a fight with the servant over nothing before exiting. Old Knowell summons Brainworm to make the servant a drink. Old Knowell reads the letter, which is from Wellbred, a roguish London gallant. It invites Edward to come and spend time at the Old Jewry, promising him that there are some unwittingly amusing people for him to meet there. Knowell is offended by the “profane and dissolute” tone of the letter and worries about Wellbred’s potential influence on his son. He worries if he’s worrying too much—“affection makes a fool / Of any man, too much the father.” Knowell summons Brainworm back into the room. He gives his servant the letter to pass on to Edward, making him promise not to tell him that he has read it—which Brainworm otherwise wouldn’t have known anyway. Brainworm exits, and Knowell resolves to “not stop” the “journey” of his son, “Nor practice any violent mean, to stay / the unbridled course of youth in him.” He says, “There is a way of winning, more by love” than “fear.”

Act I-Scene III
Brainworm delivers the letter to Edward, immediately and deliberately informing him that Old Knowell has read its contents. Stephen comes in, still annoyed about the servant earlier. Edward reads the letter, laughing heartily. Stephen worries that his cousin is laughing at him. Edward explains to Stephen that there is no need for him to be “melancholy”—he was laughing at the letter, not him.  He explains that he will go to meet his friend at the Old Jewry by crossing over Moorfields, and invites Stephen to accompany him. His cousin enthusiastically agrees. Edward sarcastically praises Stephen’s character—though the latter doesn’t pick up on the sarcasm.

Act I-Scene IV
Matthew, the town “gull,” arrives at the house of Cob the water-bearer, wondering if the latter man knows the whereabouts of Captain Bobadil. They banter a little, with Cob claiming to be descended from a royal line of fish—he insists that he is related to King Herring, “the king of fish.” Matthew is surprised to learn that Bobadil is actually lodging with Cob—he thought he would be staying elsewhere. Cob explains that Bobadil is asleep on a bench inside his house; Matthew goes in to look for him. Cob talks to himself about Matthew. Apparently, Matthew has been frequenting one of the houses where Cob delivers water—Kitely’s—and is in love with Bridget Kitely. Cob is appalled by Matthew’s habit of reading “rascally verses, poyetry” and making the women “tee-hee” at him. 

Act II-Scene I
Kitely, a cloth merchant, stands in front of his house with his assistant, Thomas Cash, and Downright. Kitely sends Cash away to complete a transaction for him and converses with Downright, explaining how much he trusts Cash—whom he brought up himself. Kitely has a thorny issue to bring up with Downright—Wellbred. The latter man, who lodges with Kitely, seems to have taken an “irregular” course and suffered a moral fall. Especially irksome for Kitely is that Wellbred has been making his house as “common as a mart, / A theatre, a public receptacle / For giddy humour, and diseased riot.” Wellbred and his “wild associates,” according to Kitely, have filled his house with “lascivious jests.” Downright is annoyed to hear of Wellbred’s lewd behavior, and predicts he’ll end up in one of the city prisons. Downright wonders why Kitely doesn’t confront Wellbred about his actions. Kitely worries that Wellbred would “be ready from this heat of humour” if he was to speak with him. He’s also upset about the way Wellbred’s associates mock him and his appearance, and fears being cuckolded; he asks Downright to speak with his half-brother.

Act II-Scene II
Matthew and Bobadil enter, looking for Wellbred. They leave when Kitely explains that he did not return to his lodging last night, but not before Bobadil calls Downright a “scavenger.” Kitely has to restrain Downright from going after Bobadil. Kitely implores Downright not to let himself be overrun by “devouring choler.” Downright goes into the house for breakfast. 

Act II-Scene III
Cob comes by, delivering water. Kitely laments the fact that he ever let Wellbred into his house, doubling down on his worry that he is likely to be cuckolded: “Beware, / When mutual appetite doth meet to treat […] It is no slow conspiracy that follows.” Dame Kitely and Mistress Bridget Kitely (Kitely’s sister) arrive. Dame Kitely sees that Kitely looks agitated and asks him whether he is feeling okay. Kitely feigns having a fever; his wife asks him to come in out of the cold. In an aside on his way into the house, Kitely worries about his growing jealousy and resolves to try to “shake the fever off, that thus shakes me.”

Act II-Scene IV
Now on the Moorfields, Brainworm enters disguised as a vagrant ex-soldier. He announces his intentions to disrupt Old Knowell’s attempts to follow and spy on Edward. Just then, Edward and Stephen come by. Stephen is fretting about having lost his purse. Brainworm, sensing that he cannot easily hide, greets them in character. He offers Stephen a sword for sale, which he promises is “very excellent good.” When Edward asks where he has served, he reels off a list of 16th century battles. Gullibly, Stephen is convinced that the sword is a good one. Brainworm assures him it is a “most pure Toledo.” Though Edward tries to persuade him otherwise, Stephen buys the sword. They all exit.

Act II-Scene V
Old Knowell arrives on the Moorfields and delivers a long speech about parenting. He vacillates between wanting to take control of Edward’s life and wanting to give him space. He talks nostalgically about his own youth, reflecting on the change in “manners” of young people in his day compared with now. Parents, he says, often pass on their own faults to their children by setting a bad example. Brainworm reappears, still in disguise, and begs Old Knowell for money. He also claims his name is Fitzsword. Knowell tells him he should be ashamed to be begging, suggesting he should go back to “the wars” or find some “honest labour.” Knowell, pitying Brainworm, says he will hire him, and exits. Brainworm delights in the effectiveness of his disguise. He plans to relay any information about Old Knowell to Edward.

Act III-Scene I
In a street near the Windmill tavern, Matthew and Bobadil tell Wellbred that they were looking for him earlier. Bobadil tries to complain to Wellbred about Downright, but Wellbred insists he change the topic of conversation. Edward enters with Stephen, greeting Wellbred warmly and calling him a “fine gallant” for his letter. Edward explains that Old Knowell contrived to read Wellbred’s letter. Wellbred promises Edward that he will enjoy listening—and mocking—Bobadil and Matthew, whom he calls his two “wind-instruments.” Likewise, replies Edward, Stephen will bring amusement to Wellbred. Stephen introduces himself to Wellbred, insisting that he is “mightily given to melancholy.” Matthew, not wanting to be left out, insists that he is melancholy too—and that this is often leads him to “take pen and paper” and “overflow” with the composition of poetry.

Act III-Scene II
Brainworm joins the group, still in disguise. Stephen confronts him angrily about the sword, with Edward and Wellbred finding this hilarious. Wellbred compares Stephen to “a drum; for everyone may play upon him.” Brainworm unveils his disguise to Edward, informing him about Old Knowell’s attempts to follow him. He then tells Edward and Wellbred that Old Knowell is currently at the house of Justice Clement, the local judicial authority.

Act III-Scene III
At his warehouse, Kitely frets over an impending business transaction that seems less than above board. His suspicion of his wife, Dame Kitely, has gotten worse. He tells Cash that he will sacrifice the business transaction in order to keep tabs on his wife. Cash reminds him that Kitely needs to go to meet his “scrivener,” who has his “bonds.” Kitely is of two minds about whether to leave or stay, comparing his brain to an “hour-glass.” He wonders if he can trust Cash to look after his home while he’s gone—or, more accurately, to look after Dame Kitely and prevent Wellbred or any of his associates from coming by. Kitely asks Cash to promise to keep a secret, though wonders paranoidly if Cash is deliberately avoiding swearing on his honor. He orders Cash to bring him word immediately if Wellbred shows up at the house, explaining that he (Kitely) will most likely be at Justice Clement’s. Kitely then insists that he had no secret and was just checking that Cash is trustworthy.

Act III-Scene IV
As Kitely departs, Cob comes by. He is ranting to himself about “fasting days.” Cash asks him what has moved him to “this choler.” Cash tells Cob that he’s probably distressed because of his “humour,” which he describes as a “gentleman-like monster, bred in the special gallantry of our time by affectation; and fed by folly.”

Act III-Scene V
Wellbred, Edward, Brainworm, Bobadil, Matthew, and Stephen arrive. Edward and Wellbred are praising Brainworm for his skill as an “artificer.” They ask Cash for Kitely’s whereabouts; Cash, starting to panic at the men’s arrival, informs them that Kitely has gone to Justice Clement. Cash frantically calls for Cob. Bobadil takes out some “Trinidado” tobacco, praising it gushingly as the most “divine” tobacco he knows. Cob arrives and complains about the “roguish tobacco,” which he says is “good for nothing but to choke a man.” Bobadil beats him with a “cudgel.” Cash drags Cob away, with Bobadil hurling insults at him. Bobadil and Matthew go inside, with the latter hoping to charm Mistress Bridget with his “verse.” Wellbred and Edward go inside to have the “happiness to hear some of his poetry now.”

Act III-Scene VI
Cob arrives at Justice Clement’s house and tells him of Wellbred’s arrival there with his entourage. Kitely panics about the “swarm” stinging his “head / With forked stings.” In an aside, Kitely shows how gripped he is by the thought that he has been cuckolded. He tries to tell himself to “be of good cheer” as “’tis done.” Kitely frantically asks Cob which of the gang kissed his wife first. Cob insists that he didn’t see any kissing at all, but this doesn’t allay Kitely’s fears. He rushes back to his house, expecting to catch Dame Kitely in the act. Though he tries to bring Cob with him, Cob insists on staying to speak with Justice Clement about Bobadil’s attack on him.

Act III-Scene VII
Justice Clement asks his assistant, Roger Formal, whether Kitely has gone. He wonders what made him leave so abruptly. Cob approaches Justice Clement to ask for an arrest warrant for Bobadil. Justice Clement laughs at Bobadil’s reason for attacking Cob—the insult over tobacco—and instead orders Formal to send Cob to jail. Old Knowell, also present, implores Justice Clement to go easy on Cob. Justice Clement scorns Cob for “abusing the virtue of an herb, so generally received in the courts of princes.” Much to Cob’s relief, Justice Clement abruptly changes his mind and grants the arrest warrant for Bobadil instead of sending Cob to prison. Evidently in a frivolous mood, Justice Clement tells Old Knowell that his worries about Edward are “nothing”; “Your son is old enough to govern himself,” he says.

Act IV-Scene I
Back at Kitely’s, Downright chastises Dame Kitely for allowing Wellbred and his entourage into the house. He blames her, but she questions how she could possibly “keep out all them, think you? I should put myself against half a dozen men?” She says he has no “sense, or reason!”

Act IV-Scene II
Bridget, Matthew, Bobadil, Wellbred, Stephen, Edward, and Brainworm all enter at Kitely’s house. Matthew intends to read some poetry to Bridget, causing Downright to leave; he’d rather “endure the stocks.” Edward and Wellbred listen amusedly as Matthew utters “stolen remnants” from Christopher Marlowe’s Hero and Leander, passing them off as his own: “Would God my rude words had the influence, / To rule thy thoughts, as thy fair looks do mine.” Wellbred asks Matthew “who made these verses.” Matthew claims to have written them, “extempore,” that very morning. Downright re-enters, increasingly vexed by the people present. Wellbred implores Bridget not to accept Matthew’s advances, calling them “tricks.” Downright takes offence at Wellbred’s use of the word “tricks.” Tensions between them quickly ramp up, and Downright tells Wellbred to go and “practice your ruffian-tricks somewhere else.” He criticizes the company Wellbred keeps and, suddenly, both men draw their weapons. Bobadil draws his sword too. The others separate them as Cash enters.

Act IV-Scene III
Kitely comes in, wondering about the cause of the commotion. Wellbred blames it on “one of my brother’s ancient humours” and leaves, with Stephen, Bobadil, Matthew, Edward and Brainworm in tow. Downright rants about Wellbred, Bobadil, and Matthew. Bridget criticizes him for being too angry. Bridget and Dame Kitely praise Edward, with Bridget suggesting she has affections for him. Dame Kitely says he is “of an exceeding fair disposition, and of very excellent good parts!” After they exit, Kitely misinterprets “parts” to mean Edward’s body, rather than the most likely intended meaning of personal qualities. Kitely thinks the “gallants” are hiding in the house and goes in to search.

Act IV-Scene IV
Now at Cob’s house, Cob confronts his wife, Tib, thinking she has cuckolded him. Cob confusedly accuses Tib of sleeping with Bobadil. He orders her to go inside, lock the door and let nobody in. He waves the arrest warrant for Bobadil in the air as she goes inside.

Act IV-Scene V
At the Windmill tavern, Edward and Wellbred instruct Brainworm, still disguised, to take a message to Downright. They talk about Bridget Kitely, whom Edward admits he has affections for. Wellbred promises Edward that he (Edward) will have her.

Act IV-Scene VI
At the Windmill tavern, Edward and Wellbred instruct Brainworm, still disguised, to take a message to Downright. They talk about Bridget Kitely, whom Edward admits he has affections for. Wellbred promises Edward that he (Edward) will have her. Brainworm relays that, during his run-in with Edward and the others, he gleaned that they are heading to Cob’s house—where Edward has his eye on “brave citizens’ wives.” Knowell instructs Brainworm to stay with Roger Formal and leaves. Roger Formal, intrigued by Brainworm’s (false) backstory, insists on buying him some wine and hearing about his life. They exit for the Windmill.

Act IV-Scene VII
Matthew, Edward, Bobadil, and Stephen speak disparagingly about Downright. Bobadil states that, with what he taught Matthew earlier about fighting, the latter should be able to kill Downright easily. Bobadil boasts of his past exploits in fighting, acting out as he does so. He brags that, if the Queen knew about him, he could save her three quarters of her annual costs in fighting wars. He says he would select a group of the right men and teach them how to fight properly. Edward (probably sarcastically) points out that Downright ought to be afraid of Bobadil. Just then, Downright arrives. Amazed that he has run into “these bragging rascals” yet again, he tells Bobadil to draw his sword. Bobadil tries to back out of the fight; Downright quickly and easily disarms him. Matthew, terrified, runs away. Downright leaves. Bobadil tries to excuse his cowardly behavior to Edward and Stephen by claiming he is bound by a “warrant of the peace” not to fight. Bobadil then claims he was “struck with a planet” that supernaturally prevented him from drawing his weapon. He leaves. Stephen picks up Downright’s discarded cloak.

Act IV-Scene VIII
Back at Kitely’s house, Wellbred explains to Kitely and Dame Kitely that anger is in Downright’s nature—and that there was “no harm done” in the earlier altercation. Dame Kitely says that “harm might have come of it”—Wellbred points out that harm could come from anything, suggesting flippantly that she might have poisoned Kitely’s wine. Kitely, in a fit of paranoia, takes Wellbred’s suggestion to heart and says he feels “ill.” Wellbred, Dame Kitely and Bridget all tell Kitely to pull himself together. Brainworm comes in, now dressed as Roger Formal. He tells Kitely that his master, Justice Clement, desires to speak with him as soon as possible. Kitely goes to look for Cash and Cob, whom he wants to act as “sentinels” while he goes to Justice Clement’s. Brainworm explains to Wellbred how he managed to procure Roger Formal’s clothes: he got the other man drunk and stole them, leaving Formal in a drunken stupor. Wellbred is impressed. He tells Brainworm to return to Edward and tell him to meet him at “the Tower,” where Wellbred has arranged for him to marry Bridget Kitely. Brainworm leaves. Kitely comes in with Cash, instructing him to stay at the house, keep note of any visitors, and interrupt any interactions they might try to have with Dame Kitely. He leaves again, looking for Cob. Dame Kitely wonders why Kitely is looking for Cob so eagerly. Wellbred mischievously implies that Kitely is interested in Cob’s wife, Tib, whom he says is a “bawd.” Now jealous too, she drags Cash off to look for Kitely with her. Wellbred tries to convince Bridget to marry Edward. She is clearly keen on the idea, but feels that Wellbred is acting too much like “an old knight-adventurer’s servant.” Just then, Kitely returns, having realized that Justice Clement had not called for him as Brainworm said. Bridget tells him that Dame Kitely has gone to Cob’s house with Cash; Kitely heads there in a fit of jealousy.

Act IV-Scene IX
Bobadil and Matthew meet in a city street. They worry about their reputations but make their excuses. When Brainworm comes by, dressed as Roger Formal, they complain to him about Downright and ask for an arrest warrant. Brainworm says he will give them what they want in exchange for money, but neither of them has any. Bobadil and Matthew give Brainworm jewelry and silk stockings in exchange for a warrant. Matthew describes Downright as a “tall big man” wearing a cloak with “russet lace.” Brainworm promises to get a city “varlet” to serve the warrant to Downright. Bobadil and Matthew exit, Brainworm announces his intentions to pawn Roger Formal’s cloak.

Act IV-Scene X
Old Knowell arrives at Cob’s house. He asks Tib who is within the house; not knowing who he is, she is reluctant to say. She tells Knowell that she’s never heard of Edward. Dame Kitely and Cash arrive. Dame Kitely demands to know where Kitely is, but Tib tells her that he isn’t there. Kitely arrives, dressed in a cloak. Thinking he is trying to disguise himself, Dame Kitely chastises Kitely for being an adulterer. Kitely, caught up in his own suspicions, thinks Dame Kitely’s secret lover is Old Knowell, “this hoary-headed lecher.” They angrily accuse one another. Old Knowell sense that a trick has been played on him for spying on Edward—and “half-forgives” Edward if he is behind it all. Cob enters, shocked to hear Kitely’s claims that Old Knowell has cuckolded him (Kitely) within Cob’s house. He beats Tib for being a “bawd.” Old Knowell tries to stop the “madness.” They all decide to go to Justice Clement for judgment.

Act IV-Scene XI
Brainworm, now disguised as a constable, encounters Matthew and Bobadil on a street. He tells them that he is on his way to arrest Downright. As Stephen comes in wearing Downright’s cloak, Brainworm puts him under arrest. Stephen protests his innocence; Bobadil points out that he is wearing the same cloak as Downright. Just then, Downright comes in. Brainworm in turn tries to serve him with the warrant on Matthew and Bobadil’s behalf; Downright agrees to go before Justice Clement. Downright asks for his cloak back. With Stephen refusing, Downright tells Brainworm to arrest him for being a thief. Stephen gives him the cloak but is forced to go to Justice Clement anyway. Brainworm tries to talk him out of it, but Downright is insistent. In fact, Downright promises to beat Brainworm if he refuses to arrest Stephen. They all head to Justice Clement’s house.

Act V-Scene I
Justice Clement, Knowell, Kitely, Dame Kitely, Cash, Tib, and Cob assemble at Justice Clement’s house. Clement is trying to get to the bottom of the “false” messages allegedly given by Roger Formal. Clement questions Dame Kitely and Kitely, getting them both to realize that each of them was convinced to search for the other at Cob’s house by Wellbred. He points out that it has all been a “mere trick.”

Act V-Scene II
A servant announces Matthew and Bobadil’s arrival. Justice Clement briefly thinks that Bobadil, described merely as a “soldier” by the servant, has come to fight him. Bobadil explains that his gripe is with Downright; he complains that Downright “despoiled me of mine honour” and disarmed him of his sword. Clement is less than impressed with Bobadil’s cowardice. The servant announces the arrival of a “varlet” of the city, with two men under arrest according to Justice Clement’s warrant. Clement is confused, having not issued any such warrant.

Act V-Scene III
Downright, Brainworm, and Stephen enter. Old Knowell explains that Stephen is his nephew. Stephen says he has been falsely accused by Downright of stealing his cloak. Justice Clement asks about the warrant; Brainworm, in disguise as the “varlet,” says he doesn’t have it—but that it was Roger Formal who told him to make the arrests. Clement asks why Downright accepted the arrest without seeing the warrant. Downright explains that Brainworm had told him he “must” serve the warrant, and he had therefore complained. Justice Clement mocks Downright for following Brainworm’s instructions, waving his sword over Brainworm, saying that he “must cut” him—but not doing so. He then instructs Brainworm to be sent to the jail for his “must.” Brainworm protests, throwing off his disguise. Old Knowell is shocked to see his servant; he is annoyed and says he suspects Brainworm “for being of counsel with my son, against me.” Brainworm admits that he was Fitzsword, the ex-soldier. He also confesses that he had been sent as a false messenger on numerous times throughout the day; he explains that Wellbred is making use of the distraction to marry Bridget and Edward. Justice Clement tells Brainworm to go and fetch the young couple, praising the “good news.” He asks Brainworm for Roger Formal’s whereabouts; Brainworm explains what happened. Clement says that Brainworm has done nothing terribly wrong and should be “pardoned for the wit o’ the offence.”

Act V-Scene IV
Roger Formal, drunk, arrives at Justice Clement’s house, followed shortly after by Edward, Wellbred, and Bridget. Clement tells Edward that he has “made your peace […] so will I for all the rest, ere you forsake my roof.”

Act V-Scene V
Edward thanks Justice Clement for his “humanity.” Clement says that only Bobadil and Matthew “have so little of man in ‘em” as to not be any “part” of his “care.” Wellbred, in jest, pleads Matthew’s case, saying he is Bridget’s official poet. Clement insists that he will challenge any poet to “extempore,” right there and then; he quotes from a sonnet by Samuel Daniel. Wellbred insists that Matthew is more of a “pocket” poet than one who likes to “extempore.” Clement notices that Matthew is carrying “commonwealth of paper” and begins to read some of the pages. Clement is incensed to see that Matthew’s verse is all plagiarized. He sets the papers alight. Clement states that a “good poet” is a rare thing, “not born every year.” Clement announces that everyone will have food and drink that evening to celebrate the marriage of Edward and Bridget—except for Bobadil and Matthew, who will have to “fast it out” for being “so false.” He tells Stephen to give Downright his cloak back. Clement then entreats Cob and Tib to be “reconciled”; they make their peace. Clement tells the rest to rid themselves of their “discontent. You, Master Downright, your anger; you, Master Knowell, your cares; Master Kitely, and his wife, their jealousy.” Clement adds that “this night” will be dedicated to “friendship, love and laughter.” He praises Brainworm and says that, one day, “grandchildren” will hear the stories of his adventures; the stories will find “both spectators, and applause.”